<?xml version='1.0'?>
<!DOCTYPE webpage PUBLIC "-//Norman Walsh//DTD Website V2.4.1//EN"
                         "dtd/website.dtd" >

<webpage id="gimpcon2003-mins-2" lang="en">

  <head>
    <title>The Second Big Serious Meeting of GIMPCon2003</title>
    <titleabbrev>Second Meeting</titleabbrev>
    <summary>Minutes of the second GIMPCon 2003 Meeting</summary>
  </head>

  <para>
    8 Aug 03, around 8pm
  </para>

  <para>
    Discussion was led by Daniel Rogers (dsrogers) but stuff said is
    for the most part anonymous. Partly because there shouldn't be any
    ad hominem attacks that way, and partly because I didn't take down
    any names.
  </para>

  <para>
    Present: Daniel Rogers (dsrogers), Raphaël Quinet, Dave Neary
    (bolsh), Sven Neumann (Sven), Michael Natterer (mitch), Henrik
    Brix Andersen (brix), Jakub Steiner (jimmac), Simon Budig (nomis),
    Marc Lehmann, Ville Pätsi (drc), Øyvind Kolås (pippin), Calvin
    Williamson (calvin), Roman Joost (romanofski), Maurits Rijk
    (Maurits), Branko Collins (bbc).
  </para>

  <para>
    Topic discussion, in approximate chronological order:
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="features">Features required for 2.0</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="documentation">Documentation</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="web">Web-site</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="roadmap">Roadmap</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="bugs">Bugs</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="tasks">Task List</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="foundation">GIMP Foundation</link>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <link linkend="manager">Release manager</link>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
  </para>

  <section id="features">
    <title>Features required for 2.0</title>

    <para>
      There was quite a lot of talk on what was required for a 2.0
      release. It was agreed that a pre-release should have feature
      complete versions of everything going into 2.0, for obvious
      reasons. These can be somewhat buggy, but they should at least
      support what is supported in the 1.2 equivalents.
    </para>

    <para>
      The major features or API changes which it was agreed are
      necessary are:
    <orderedlist>
      <listitem>Complete path tool (nomis)</listitem>
      <listitem>Remove libgck (Sven and mitch)</listitem>
      <listitem>Finish the text tool (Sven)</listitem>
      <listitem>Documentation (more on this later)</listitem>
      <listitem>Web-site (again, more on this later)</listitem>
      <listitem>Some libgimp changes which need to be made now so that
      we can havebinary compatibility across a 2.2 release</listitem>
    </orderedlist>
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="documentation">
    <title>Documentation</title>

    <para>
      We felt that with pre-releases, the documentation will become
      more complete. There should, however, be an effort to actively
      get people writing docs. The main requirement, then, for 2.0
      pre-releases will be to have a working help framework, so that
      when people hit F1 for help, they at least get a message saying
      <quote>This help item does not exist yet.If you would like to
      help write it, contact docs@gimp.org</quote> or some such.
      <footnote>
	<para>
          That email address doesn't exist (yet). People interested in
          helping with the documentation should have a look at the
          <ulink url="http://wiki.gimp.org/gimp/GimpDocs">Wiki</ulink>.
        </para>
      </footnote>
    </para>

    <para>
      If documentation is going to be released as a separate package,
      as now seems likely, then we will need to define the interface
      between the core and the help pages reasonably quickly. The
      general idea is to more or less hard-code tagnames for a
      particular help topic, and get the core and help using the same
      tags, and agreeing on how they be communicated. This will
      presumably require a considerable amount of communication with
      the help team.
    </para>

    <para>
      We also need to have the docs browsable online so that if people
      want to browse them they can.
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="web">
    <title>Web-site</title>

    <para>
      The new site should switch over to www.gimp.org soon. There will
      obviously be quite a bit of pain involved as content gets added
      and we get lots of <quote>your website sucks</quote> type
      feedback, but this will only befor the short term. We should
      switch to mmaybe as the main site before 2.0pre1. It was
      suggested to do it even earlier than that, in the region of 2 to
      3 weeks time.
    </para>

    <para>
      It was also discussed whether it was a good idea to have a
      separate coordinator for the website.
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="roadmap">
    <title>Roadmap</title>

    <para>
      As an approximate set of ideals, it was agreed that we want
      this: 2.0pre1 very soon, 2.0 soon, 2.2 next year, and Gegl
      integration the end of next Summer.
    </para>

    <para>
      More specifically, the near-term release schedule that we agreed
      was reasonable is this:
    </para>

    <para>
      1 or 2 developer releases (one now, more or less, and another
      one in another 2 weeks). 6 weeks time (end of September 2003):
      First pre-release of 2.0, including the features mentioned
      above, and any other minor features that people code in the
      meantime (hint, hint). Roughly 3 months later: 2.0
    </para>

    <para>
      It was more or less agreed that 3 to 4 weeks was a nice
      turnaround time for pre-releases, so that would imply between 4
      and 6 (inclusive) pre-releases before 2.0.
    </para>

    <para>
      The reason for not having a pre-release straight away was
      mentioned above: to be feature complete, some features need a
      little more than 2 weeks work, and people have real lives. So 6
      weeks was felt to be a reasonable amount of time to have the
      path tool and the help browser in place.
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="bugs">
    <title>Bugs</title>

    <para>
      The developer release will also be a prelude to a bug week. We
      would like people (that's you, in particular) to actively work
      on bugzilla clean-up for 2.0 - bugs need to be prioritized,
      unconfirmed bugs need confirming and milestoning (and if you're
      feeling really helpful, fixing). The idea would more or less be
      that the 2.0 milestone will be locked down for anything other
      than serious bugs after this bug week, so if there are bugs that
      are annoying you a lot, this is your chance to get them
      considered and worked on for the 2.0 releases.
    </para>

    <para>
      Just to spell that out - at the end of the bug week, any bugs
      reported against The GIMP in CVS will be milestoned for 2.0.x,
      or even 2.2, unless they are considered blockers for the
      release. If we want to get a 2.0 release soon, we need to get
      lots of testing done, and lots of bugfixing done, but we also
      need to choose what to do and what not to do. We felt this was a
      reasonable compromise.
    </para>

    <para>
      It was also re-discussed whether it would make sense to have
      module owners. The conclusion was that for certain components,
      it makes sense to have a smaller group of people getting the bug
      reports and having responsibility for them. This would be done
      via mail aliases for the group of people guiding the component,
      in a similar way to that which is used for (say) gtktreeview in
      gtk+.
    </para>

    <para>
      The module owner group wouldn't have to be technical, and we
      should be actively recruiting people to do this kind of work and
      leave more time for programmers to program.
    </para>

    <para>
      This leads us on to...
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="tasks">
    <title>Task list</title>

    <para>
      There are lots of non-technical jobs that need doing around the
      gimp-docs, website, bugzilla triage, internationalisation,
      etc. Often it is quite difficult to know what needs doing, and
      who to contact about getting it done. We need a list of
      bite-sized tasks that people can do, including the kinds of
      tasks that only take a few hours a week to do, but are ongoing
      tasks.
    </para>

    <para>
      We used to have a TODO, and we could use that system again, if
      someone were maintaining it. That could come under the remit of
      the release manager to some extent, but since the mainenance of
      the TODO list is mostly a non-technical task, anyone could do it
      (in fact, as an example of a task, <quote>Maintaining the TODO
      list</quote> would go in the TODO list).
    </para>

    <para>
      We might do this through Bugzilla using a keyword to allow
      getting at the list easily, which would imply getting more
      people looking at bugzilla regularly. Then again, if there were
      a link to a bugzilla query on the webpage marked <quote>GIMP
      TODO list</quote> we could get that for free.
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="foundation">
    <title>GIMP Foundation</title>

    <para>
      Basically, we're agreed this is a good idea to have some kind of
      public face people and companies can contribute to. There is no
      problem with having 2 foundations, one in Europe and one in the
      US. It was more or less agreed that assigning copyright to the
      foundation isn't going to happen soon (for a start, so many
      plug-in authors have gone their merry way and are almost
      unfindable) This may hapen in the future, but most people felt
      that it would not be something they'd be happy doing personally.
    </para>

    <para>
      Other people said they would prefer to assign copyright to an
      organism under the jurisdiction of European law rather than
      under US jurisdiction.
    </para>

    <para>
      So, to sum up, there's no reason not to have one of
      these. Daniel Rogers has agreed to do the necessary paperwork
      and set up the foundation and the bank account for donations in
      the US. Pretty quickly after getting that up and going, we will
      need to get a board of directors and a set of by-laws. We know
      lots of people who can help with this (in particular, the GNOME
      foundation and the FSF).
    </para>

    <para>
      If someone wants to set up an equivalent in Europe, we're all
      ears. Currently no-one has said they'll do it, so it's an open
      point. To start, the foundation will only be a board an a bank
      account - in the future, we could expand its responsibilities to
      promotional work, a single point where people could go to get
      speakers, a group that does press releases and so on. It was
      agreed that at least in the short term it is undesirable to have
      the foundation have actual control of source code, just in case
      the foundation then gets sued.
    </para>

    <para>
      In brief, it's being set up with a very narrow remit, with the
      possibility to expand later if it is felt that there is a need.
    </para>

  </section>

  <section id="manager">
    <title>Release manager</title>

    <para>
      The responsibilities are:
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        Follow CVS so that he can write release notes, and knows at
        any given time who is working on what, and at what stage it
        is
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        Follow bugzilla closely
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        Make releases regularly, according to the roadmap (or make
        sure releases get made)
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        Update the roadmap to reflect reality
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        Write release notes for the releases (keep NEWS up to date)
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        Generally annoy people sending mails to the mailing lists and
        sending content to the website to explain the state of play
        and get people to work on stuff.
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
    </para>

    <para>
      Dave Neary (me) agreed to do this. He already regrets it.
    </para>

    <para>
      That's it folks - today, Sven and mitch are going to talk to us
      about the major changes in the codebase and the general utility
      stuff which exists now which has been written from scratch,
      Calvin and Daniel are going to talk about Gegl and how we can
      use it, and work towards having a Gegl that we can use in a
      year. I'm going to lead a discussion on communication in the
      GIMP, and how to maybe make it easier for people to contribute,
      and jimmac is going to demonstrate what a power user really is.
    </para>

    <para>
      Goodbye from everyone at camp. As usual, comments are welcome on
      all this stuff. While on a philosophical level, we are agreed on
      the direction things should take, all the details are open to
      discussion, if there's any reason to change them.
    </para>

  <para>
    Written by Dave Neary
  </para>

  </section>

</webpage>
